This directory contains configuration files for generating a
*bookdown* compilation of the BioCro documentation files meant for
developers.  It also includes the "index.Rmd" file that specifies the
list of source files used in generating that documentation.  Markdown
files for the book that don't logically belong elsewhere can be added
to the subdirectory "book_source".

INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPILING THE BOOKDOWN BOOK

To generate a *bookdown* book of this documentation, do as follows:

1. Install Pandoc, if it is not already on your system.  See
https://pandoc.org/installing.html for instructions.  (Note to RStudio
users: As mentioned in the R Markdown Cookbook
(https://bookdown.org/yihui/rmarkdown-cookbook/install-pandoc.html),
RStudio comes with its own copy of Pandoc, so you may be able to get
by without installing it separately.)

2. Start an R session.

3. Install the R "bookdown" package, if it hasn't been installed
already.  These instructions are written for bookdown version 0.22 or
greater but may work for other versions.

4. Call either "bookdown::render_book(<path>)" or
"rmarkdown::render_site(<path>)", where "<path>" denotes the path from
the current directory to the "bookdown" directory (i.e., *this*
directory).  If either command is run *from* this directory
("bookdown"), the path argument may be omitted.

Note: The "bookdown::render_book()" function does not accept a <path>
argument in versions of bookdown below version 0.22.  To compile the
book with "render_book" in those versions, either run
"bookdown::render_book()" from the "bookdown" directory or take
advantage of the "xfun::in_dir" function and call
"xfun::in_dir('<path>', bookdown::render_book())", where "<path>"
denotes the path from the current directory to the bookdown directory
(*this* directory).

Alternatively, if you are using a Linux or macOS machine, you can take
advantage of the "run_bookdown.sh" script in the
"documentation/script" directory: Simply go to that directory in a
terminal program and type "./run_bookdown.sh" (without quotes).

Note: Because some sections of the book are contained in their own
files rather than being in a larger file comprising a complete
chapter, you will get a warning such as the following, which may be
safely ignored:

"In split_chapters(output, gitbook_page, number_sections, split_by,  :
  You have 11 Rmd input file(s) but only 7 first-level heading(s). Did you forget first-level headings in certain Rmd files?"

4. In a Web browser, open bookdown/_book/index.html.
